WSDL - Web Services Description Language - XML Based language
used by webservices to describe functionality that they offer.

equivalent to class and method descriptions of normal code.

a wsdl description of a webservice provides all information about :

how to call the web service
what parameters to pass
and what data structures they expect to get back.


they key point here is Abstraction

Normal Services

Information Required:

Programming Language
Method Location
Data types of inputs.
Data types of the outputs

wsdl provides standardized messages.
any computer can read an xml file, there is no need to be compatible to the programming language of the web service

all the end user needs to know is

the data type of input
and data type of outputs


WSDL 2.0 structures each message according to following points:


WSDL Message Parts:

1. Service
service part of the message contains direct references to the endpoints, their bindings and their locations.
the location is defined by a simple http url string which could be in an external website or port on your computer.

2. Binding
specifies the interface and tells the reader what kind of soap binding style and transfer will be used

such as RPC or document styling encodings.

it also contains one or more operations tags. that define the operation with soap

3. interface defines webservice itself , including all of the methods
as with the bindings each method of the webservice is represented by an operation tag

inside that tag there is an input and an output tag
these indicate to the user what data structures are accepted and returned by the method

these tags are descriptive

e.g
stock prices
input tag year
output tag price.


4. types tag defines data itself , this is done using the xml schema language. this essentially converts the descriptive names for the message inputs and outputs
into raw data types.

from the tags mentioned before.
we might set type of year to be integer and price to be of the type double.







